Dynamics software for human health.
 
This work was funded by the NLM grant “Discovering and Applying Knowledge in
Clinical Databases” (funded by LM006910)
 
 
MATLAB software for computing the time delayed mutual information (TDMI) for
a non-uniformly measured, possibly heterogeneous population.
 
This source contains a non-optimized, sometimes stupidly parallelized,
version of the TDMI calculation for a non-uniformly sampled population. The
zip file contains several versions of the code ranging from a single black
box version to a version that can be run on a BEOWULF cluster.  This code
(or similar versions) was used for:
 
Albers, D. J., Hripcsak, G., “A statistical dynamics approach to the study
of human heath data: resolving population scale diurnal variation in
laboratory data” Phys. Lett. A 374 (2010) 1159-1164

Albers, D. J, Hripcsak, G., “Using time-delayed mutual information to
discover and interpret temporal structure in complex populations,” CHAOS 22
(2012), 013111

Albers, D. J., Hripcsak, G., “Estimation of time-delayed mutual information
from sparsely sampled sources,” Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 45 (2012)
853-860.

Albers, D.J., Hripcsak, G, Schmidt, M., “Population Physiology: Leveraging
Electronic Health Record Data to Understand Human Endocrine Dynamics,” PLoS
One 7 (12), e48058, 2012

SOURCE: tdmi.zip
 
MATLAB software for computing the empirical orthogonal functions for EEG
data.
 

This source contains a non-optimized, sometimes stupidly parallelized,
version of the empirical orthogonal functional analysis (EOF) calculation
for an individual or population of EEG power spectrum multivariate time
series. The zip file contains several versions of the code useful for
different contexts, including code that returns only the first EOF versus
code that returns all N EOFs.  This code (or similar versions) was used for:
 

Albers, D.J., Claassen, J, Schmidt, M., Hripcsak, G., “A methodology for
detecting and exploring non-convulsive seizures in patients with acute brain
injury,”  (2013) arXiv:1305.7271, in press NOLTA 2013 Santa Fe NM.

SOURCE: eeg_eof.zip

MATLAB software for computing the lagged correlation (linear and mutual
information) for a non-informally measured, possibly heterogeneous
population
 
This source contains a non-optimized, sometimes stupidly parallelized,
version of the lagged correlation (both linear and mutual information based
correlations) calculation for a non-uniformly sampled population. The zip
file contains several versions of the code ranging from a single black box
version to a version that can be run on a BEOWULF cluster.  This code (or
similar versions) was used for:
 
Hripcsak, G., Albers, D.J., Perotte, A., “Exploiting time in electronic
health record correlations,” JAMIA 18 (2011), 109-115

Claassen, J., Perotte, A., Albers, D.J.,, Kleinberg, S., Schmidt, J.M., Tu,
B., Badjatia, N., Lee, K., Mayer, S.A., Connolly, E.S., Hirsch, L.J., and
Hripcsak, G., “Electrographic seizures after subarachnoid hemorrhage lead to
derangement of brain homeostasis in humans,” accepted to Annals of
Neurology, 2013

SOURCE: llc.zip
 
MATLAB software for mechanistic modeling of glucose/insulin for a variety of
nutrition schemes for individuals and populations.
 
This source contains a non-optimized, sometimes stupidly parallelized,
simulation of the Sturgis et. al. mechanistic glucose/insulin model. The
code contains several nutrition schemes, and can be run for individuals, a
population, and is set up for sweeping parameters to observe physiologic
changes. The zip file contains several versions of the code useful for
different contexts, including code meant to be run on a BEOWULF cluster. 
This code (or similar versions) was used for:
 
Albers, D.J., Hripcsak, G, Schmidt, M., “Population Physiology: Leveraging
Electronic Health Record Data to Understand Human Endocrine Dynamics,” PLoS
One 7 (12), e48058, 2012

Sedigh-Sarvestani, M., and Albers, D.J., and Gluckman, B.J., “Data
assimilation of glucose dynamics for use in the intensive care unit,”, 34th
Annual International Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (2012) in
press.

Albers, D.J., Elhadad, N., Tabak, E., Perotte, A., Hripcsak, G, “Dynamical
phenotying: using temporal analysis of clinically collected physiologic data
to stratify populations ,” submitted.

SOURCE: mechanistic_glucose_modeling.zip
 
MATLAB software used for general manipulation, simulation, etc., of EHR
data.
 
This source contains a non-optimized, sometimes stupidly parallelized,
collection of calculations, some simple, some not, that are useful for
manipulating EHR data using MATLAB. The tools range from methods for
selecting (without replacement) a random set of patients, to creating a fake
EHR, to removing features of the data (e.g., NaNs, 0s, etc.) that can cause
computational headaches.
 
SOURCE: ehr_resources.zip
 
COMING SOON: MATLAB software for: (i) mediation analysis, (ii) hierarchical
clustering of time dependent signals; (iii) select mex (MATLAB-C hybrid)
versions of various compuations.
 
All questions, comments, bug reports, etc., should be directed to david dot
albers at dbmi dot columbia dot edu.
 